# Title

SRFI XYZ: Ordered Key Value Store (wip)

# Author

Amirouche Boubekki

# Status

???

# Abstract

This library describe an interface for ordered key-value store that is
suitable to implement a storage engine for the generic tuple store
SRFI. It maps cleanly with existing ordered key-value databases that
may or may not provide transactions.

# Rationale

Ordered key-value stores offers a powerful set of primitives to build
databases abstractions (also sometimes called layers). The generic
tuple store SRFI is an example of such abstraction. A standard
interface for such databases will allow more people to experiment with
other abstractions.

This SRFI does not overlap with existing SRFIs and complement the
[generic tuple store SRFI](https://git.io/fjmez).

# Specification

## Database and Transaction

Database is a mapping that may or may not support transactions where
keys are lexicographically ordered bytevectors and values are
bytevectors.

The following specification defines two disjoint types:

- `database` is a handle over the database
- `transaction` is a handle over a currently running transaction

### `(make . args)`

Returns a database object. `ARGS` is implementation dependant and
allows to configure the underlying database connection. It might be
the path to the directory or file where the database is stored or the
location of a configuration file or the host and port in case the
database is accessed over the network.

### `(close database . args)`

Close `DATABASE`. `ARGS` are implementation dependant.

### `(begin! database . args)`

Start a transaction and returns a transaction object. `ARGS` allow to
configure the transaction and are implementation dependant.

### `(commit! transaction . args)`

Commit the transaction. `ARGS` allow to configure the transaction and
are implementation dependant.

### `(rollback! transaction . args)`

Rollback the transaction. `ARGS` allow to configure the transaction
and are implementation dependant.

### `(ref transaction key)`

Returns the bytevector associated with `KEY` bytevector using
`TRANSACTION`. If there is no such key returns `#f`.

### `(set! transaction key value)`

Associates `KEY` bytevector to `VALUE` bytevector using `TRANSACTION`.

### `(rm! transaction key)`

Delete the pair associated with `KEY` bytevector using `TRANSACTION`.

### `(range transaction prefix)`

Returns a srfi 158 generator of key-value pairs where keys starts with
`PREFIX` bytevector. The stream must lexicographically
ordered. `PREFIX` can be the empty bytevector, in that case the all
the pairs are returned in a generator.

## Lexicographic Packing

This section defines two procedures `(pack . items)` and `(unpack
bytevector)` which allows to translate back-and-forth scheme objects
to bytevectors in a way that preserves lexicographic ordering. The
ordering between types is defined as follow:

1. `*null*`
2. bytevector
3. string
5. exact number
6. float
7. double
8. boolean

The implementation might support symbols, lists and vectors at the
risk of being incompatible with existing databases.

`*null*` is a singleton that must be provided by the implementation.

Note: This is different from srfi 128 because a) it is not possible to
	  pack inexact and exact numbers using the same algorithm while
	  preserving a total order. b) it allows to be compatible with
	  [existing FoundationDB packing function](https://git.io/fjq7T).

### `(pack . items)`

Returns a bytevector that preserve lexicographic ordering as described
above. The accepted object types is implementation dependant, see the
above note.

### `(unpack bytevector)`

Returns values packed in `BYTEVECTOR`. It is an error, if `BYTEVECTOR`
encode object not supported by the implementation.

# Implementation

The sample implementation rely on scheme mapping (srfi 146) and srfi
158.

# Acknowledgements

Credits goes to WiredTiger and FoundationDB authors for their work on
their respective database engines. The author would like to thank
Arthur A. Gleckler, Marc Nieper-Wi√ükirchen for getting together SRFI
146 and Shiro Kawai, John Cowan, Thomas Gilray for their work on SRFI
158.

# Copyright

Copyright (C) Amirouche Boubekki (2019).

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
